[music]
>> Bloomberg Audio Studios. Podcasts,
radio, news.
>> [music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway.
And I'm Joe Weisenthal. Joe, you know I
spend a lot of my time doing interior
design. Yes. I I've bored you, I'm sure,
with um a lot of thoughts on this topic.
But then it struck me recently that
actually what I'm doing is not really
interior design. It's actually just
interior decorating. Cuz I'm not really
changing the structure of a particular
house. I don't like doing that in part
because I'm lazy and I hate construction
mess, but also because it's a lot harder
to change the particular design of a
house than it is to just get new fabric
for the windows or new paint color.
There are more real-world constraints
Yeah, that's an interesting way to put
it. I can confirm, having looked over
from time to time, you know, we sit next
to each other. I I can confirm having
looked at you say like looking at
wallpaper and very you vintage wallpaper
that you might be acquiring. But no, I I
have not heard of you sort of talk
about, you know, knocking down big walls
or whatever inside your home. Although I
certainly, you know, in New York City,
you know people who do that. And they
hire an architect as part of they'll buy
two condos or something like that and
can join them and hire an architect and
so forth. That's a different level. It's
a different level of constraints and
obligations.
>> This is the other thing I've been
thinking. Am I a product of my time?
Because so much of the cultural emphasis
nowadays seems to be on interior design
and what the inside of a building looks
like versus the exterior. And I think if
I had been do you know, thinking about
these things in like the '90s or the
'80s,
I would be much more into architecture.
It's really interesting thought and I
hadn't really thought of it that way.
But that makes a lot of sense and my you
know, my uninformed gut is like, oh,
does social media make it so that people
are just much more obsessed with the
interior design of a building, the the
specific aesthetic choices that are
made? But, of course, on the other hand,
you know, we work at Bloomberg, we have
a big office in London.
>> Many beautiful buildings.
>> Many beautiful buildings, lots of glass,
the new one new London HQ, absolutely
gorgeous building, etc. And so, you
know, we do live surrounded in this
world that
the world we live in is one that was
built by architects or designed by
architects.
>> Absolutely. And this was the other thing
I was thinking about architecture in
relation to economics is
when it's done well, a beautiful
building ends up being a public good,
right? It can boost an entire
neighborhood, it can revive a particular
city, it can improve the flow of
traffic, improve energy efficiency, do
all these things.
>> Yeah. But, so many buildings are still
designed by private developers, and I'm
not sure they're always incentivized to
do beautiful design in that way. Like,
how do you incentivize a private
developer to do something that ends up
being a public good? It's a fascinating
question. I hadn't really thought of it
framed in that way, but like like for
example, again, like the new JP Morgan
building in New York City, I like it. I
don't I don't work there, but I think
it's like a cool addition to the
skyline, it blinks, etc. There's a lot
of cool things. But, how do you design,
how do you incentivize a public good is
a good way to frame it. Well, since you
mentioned the JP Morgan building, that
is a big
>> Purposely dropping breadcrumbs.
>> Yes. Uh
a huge clue. So, we do in fact have the
perfect guest for today's show. We are
going to be speaking to a very famous
architect, Lord Norman Foster. He is of
course the founder of Foster and
Partners, and we are here with him in
Madrid. In his in his studio and his
foundation. Thank you so much for coming
on the show. Thank you.
So, how much of architecture is about
dealing with real-world constraints? Cuz
I always think there's not there's not
just physics and finance, but you're
also dealing with things like zoning.
And I guess in the UK, you're also
dealing with listing requirements and
things like that. How much does that
constrain you?
It's totally rooted in the process of
design. So, you cannot separate
Design is really a response to
constraints.
And whether those constraints come from
the codes, whether they come from the
requirements for the building, because a
building is a response to a need. It
then takes on more layers, yes. It's in
the public domain, but it's shaped by
constraints, by needs. It's a response.
So, if you don't have those constraints,
if you don't have those demands, if you
don't have to meet certain requirements,
performance, um
some of those are tangible, you can
measure them. Some
uh less obvious, more subconscious,
perhaps below the surface, but
nonetheless.
So, it's a Design is a response to
needs. We're in this uh gorgeous
building of yours, and we were just
looking that, you know, over there on
the shelf there for um a series of wood
samples, for example, different types of
wood from different trees.
>> plum wood.
At the highest levels of architecture,
to do a great building, how much do you
does the architect really need to know?
I guess maybe material science, or at
least the true nature of specific
materials. I think the more that you
know about the issues around any
assignment,
>> [clears throat]
>> the more you're empowered as a designer.
So,
that has led me over decades to promote
a particular way of designing which is
counterintuitive.
It's against everything that we're
taught in a school of architecture or
engineering. And that is you bring all
the disciplines together around a table
and you work from the outset together.
Now,
a critic of that will say that sounds
like a committee architecture. It's not.
I mean basically the team is going to be
involved in that project. So, if the
architect designs and then hands it over
to the engineer to make it stand up, to
make it hot when it's cold outside and
the reverse,
you lose the opportunity of the
feedback. If you get that at the outset,
the designers are more empowered. And
the designers are really a wider team.
But that
needs a process of reeducation
because engineers have been taught
"Show me what you want. I'll make it
work." Yeah.
Architects have been taught that they
should design in isolation. It goes
further. Architects are taught about
doing a building in isolation. A city
outside is a street.
You could argue the street is the
essence of the traditional city.
Architects and urbanists are not taught
about designing streets. Uh so, planners
are taught in terms of zoning, in terms
of the legalities. [clears throat]
Architects are taught about individual
buildings. So, in a way, we have to
reassess how we educate and in our
terms, we reeducate, whether it's here
in a foundation preparing civic leaders
for the future, enabling them to be able
to tell the difference between fashion,
prejudice, style, and data and evidence.
And the same is true in terms of a
building or a city plan.
Joe brought up the wood samples. I can't
help but notice that the majority of
items in this room are related to
transportation. So, cars and jets and
trains as well. I also read The city.
The city plan.
>> [laughter]
>> But
I also read in an older interview, I
think someone asked you your favorite
building and you replied a jumbo jet.
Do you have an interest in engineering?
Should you have been an engineer instead
of an architect?
>> I love flights. I love automobiles.
And and I think that as designers we get
our
inspirations from many different
[clears throat] directions. I was
deliberately being tongue in cheek in
terms of the jumbo jet. But it What I
really wanted to do was to
get
the audience thinking in a different way
about a jumbo because when you think
about it,
it's a restaurant, it's a cinema, it's a
hotel, and all the while it's moving
from one place to the other. And also to
to start to to think about the the
miracle of flight. I mean, there's still
an extraordinary magic that these uh
these machines, which are weighing tons,
can somehow by lumbering along the
runway, suddenly levitate and then
transport us vast distances. And I think
there are also a lot of lessons in terms
of the built world. In other words, how
how can we use harness technology to
improve the quality of life?
I'm really fascinated by this idea of
Okay, so one might think that an
architect is someone who draws lines,
draws sketches on a piece of paper, and
then maybe there is an engineering firm,
and then there's a construction firm,
and then so forth. I'm fascinated by
this idea, and it rings true with other
discussions we have. You know, we talk
to traders, for example, and there's
obviously a difference between thinking
in your head on a good trade versus
what it actually Literally this morning
I was sitting around a table with a
group of us as architects here in the
foundation on a project alongside the
individual who will be going to build
that building, and we're saying, "Well,
the next stage is to do this, we really
have to have the environmental engineer.
We have to have this structural
engineer." And that will be the next
meeting. So, that was the first meeting.
Now, we were able to go so far, but only
so far, and we recognize the need to
have those other skills on board. Now,
we could have
and it would have been absolutely
traditional, we could have just
collectively designed
that building, and then just passed it
on. But it would be there would be so
many lost opportunities because if you
think of a building as an integration of
systems, I mean, if I tried to bring
this back to
the world of automotive design, and I
found myself trying to communicate that
this principle to a group of automotive
engineers, not just the engineers, but
those who are making the cars. And the
example that I took was
a point in time in the 1930s
when pretty well
all of the cars
any production car followed a certain
pattern.
It was a chassis and then a body on top
of that, which was a shell to enclose
and protect the occupants from the rain,
the elements, from nature. And then
at one point
a car emerged. It was the Chrysler
Airflow.
And the body became not just a shell, it
became an integral part of the
structure.
So, the car was lighter
and the car was immensely stronger. The
promotional video of that time, they
pushed the car off the top of the
mountain and it kind of rolled and
rolled and landed four square. Somebody
comes out of the bushes, demonstrates
that the Yeah, opens the door, gets in
and drives away.
The point is then that the two separate
systems
of the shell and the chassis have merged
into one element, which is doing both
jobs better. So, it's doing more with
less. Now, imagine that we're talking
about the exterior of a building,
heating and cooling it. If you think of
integrated design, then you're going to
end up if all those skills are working
together, you can really do a system
approach to design. You can start to get
things doing double duty, performing
more, less components, higher
performance, more quality and better
quality of life. Whether So, that
principle, whether it's in a city or a
building, is all of that is to a social
end.
>> [music]
>> How do you think about the social end of
buildings when you're given a particular
project? So, I know that you often do
public buildings and I imagine that you
are in dialogue with cities and states
around the world when you're doing
those. But when you're given a private
assignment such as a JP Morgan building
or a Bloomberg office, how do you think
about the public good aspect of design?
You're thinking simultaneously
of how that building works from the
inside out.
And you're also thinking simultaneously
from the outside in.
Because arguably there're two completely
separate groups of people.
Private inside, public outside, but the
building is in the public domain. So, if
I took the headquarters of Bloomberg,
then an early [clears throat] decision
was to intersect the building with
Watling Street. Watling Street was the
old Roman road opposite. If you
acknowledge that and you continue that
and it became an arcade through the
building and you had connectivity over
that arcade, then simultaneously you
were breaking down the scale of the
building. It was then more human. And
the public space is bringing in an
artist to create water, benches. That
was also double duty, the systems
approach, providing security. But it
wasn't an ugly bollard. You didn't know
it was providing security. It was also
bringing people together. Then the
arcade is an opportunity to introduce
shops and so on. That is working with
the Bloomberg philosophy of encouraging
the neighborhood to benefit from this
private entity coming into the
community, rather than it being an
island and killing off the traders. It's
encouraging local traders. Now,
everything I've described then is
working to the benefit of the interior
of the building. And the facades are
starting to be able to breathe and pull
lots of fresh air into the building. So,
it's making the building a healthier
building. But, it's also on the exterior
not another glass box. It's a
combination of bronze and the local
stone, local stone, the stone of the
adjoining buildings. Uh so, it's working
environmentally in terms of
sustainability, it's reducing energy,
it's creating a healthier building for
the occupants. And then, because it's
deep and low, it's not pushing into the
sky. So, it is
reverential to the historic buildings
around it of a same mass.
But, at the same time, it's creating
horizontality, and horizontality is good
for communication. And Bloomberg is
about communication. Now, I could
describe another kind of building for a
completely different kind of
of how can I say client body
also in the high-tech business. So, if I
go to
Beijing, if I talk about a building
there,
the company ethos is totally different.
It's about competition between groups.
So, it's the polar opposite, and I could
describe that in detail. The point that
I'm making is that as I take you through
these decisions, the way that they
overlap and interact, you start to
realize that the process of design is
about balancing. It's about reconciling.
It's about creating something which is
simultaneously
working in the public domain, working
for a visitor, working for those inside
when they come outside.
Well, since you alluded to it, and now
I'm now I'm particularly particularly
curious about it, I imagine that in the
decades ahead, you know, there will
still be new JP Morgan headquarters, new
Bloomberg headquarters, etc. But there's
probably going to be a lot more mega
projects still coming out of Asia or
Beijing or China specifically. And so
when you describe that environment as
different, what should the architects of
the future know about working in these
markets? First of all, I mean, I I I
took the example of uh of the building
in China. That same
need could be anywhere.
>> Okay. It just happened to be in China.
So, you could have in China exactly the
same requirements as a building like JP
Morgan or or Bloomberg. Although, of
course,
um no two buildings are alike. I mean,
each is specific to its own
organization, the values of those
organizations,
the aspirations of those who've created
them, whether they're an individual like
Mike Bloomberg in Bloomberg, whether
it's Steve Jobs with Apple, or whether
it's much more corporate, more
anonymous, but nonetheless, there are
those the those values. I would say that
common to any building anywhere is how
do you anticipate the future? So, if I
go back to an early building which
recently celebrated its half-century,
and that was the Willis Faber building
in Ipswich, an insurance headquarters.
And in the life of that building, that
building had
a high degree of flexibility.
And nobody in their wildest dreams
anticipated that that flexibility would
be used.
But in no time at all after it opened,
it opened with typewriters.
And in no time, that building, and it
was the only building in the insurance
industry which was as a headquarters
able to adapt, it adapted to the digital
revolution, to screens. And the same was
true of the Hong Kong Bank. The Hong
Kong Bank, which I also recently went to
their 40th anniversary, as opposed to
Willis Faber and their 50th anniversary.
So, a
literally a few weeks ago I was there at
that celebration. And the same thing
there, that building,
quite radical at the time, and still in
many ways radical, took the traditional
central core of a tower,
which contained the structure, the
vertical circulation, the bathrooms,
mechanical plant, took all that,
fragmented it, put it at the sides of
big open loft things. Nobody anticipated
that in the life of that building, the
early life, there would be something
known as a trading floor, where you need
clear line of sight.
That wasn't a need in the 19 late 1970s
when the competition for that building,
but it was able to absorb that. Um so, I
think that
the whole thing about the
about the future is that by design you
can, if I say that you create a building
for the needs of today with an awareness
of the past,
but to as far as you're able to
anticipate a future which is largely
unknown. But the perhaps in terms of
infrastructure,
having
been backwards and forwards to Asia, and
if I say China more specifically, over
the last 30 years, I mean the changes
that I've seen, which interestingly I
was communicating earlier this week to
the Bloomberg event
audience here and sharing that
experience with them and showing them
the
China when I first went there and it's
foggy, it's misty, you can't see.
The cities now
unbelievable. I mean cleaner,
90% of the vehicles electric and
and extraordinary amount of green. I
mean Shanghai is 50%, Beijing 50% green.
That's happened
>> [clears throat]
>> over the last few
decades and and in terms of
connectivity,
just over 54,000
kilometers of high-speed Yeah.
>> train. 220 miles an hour, 350 kilometers
an hour connecting
by this 97%
of Chinese cities.
On a peak day, 13 million travelers.
Achieved in 16 years.
And
in the UK,
they gave up
on the London to Manchester. It goes as
far as Birmingham. Short-termism. They
have a department for leveling up. The
ultimate leveling up is connectivity.
They just didn't get [clears throat] it.
And that 54,000 km is more than the rest
of the world put together by a huge
margin.
Why do you think certain countries, and
you brought up the UK there, but you
could possibly say it the same for the
US as well. Why do you think certain
countries struggle
>> Because
because at every stage in the emergence,
the emergence of of a nation, whether
that
is the United Kingdom
in its empire days, the industrial
revolution, it led the world. We're
still trading right now on that. I mean,
the Thames Embankment was a response to
cholera.
It created, if if you like, systems
thinking and you know, doing more with
less. It also introduced below-ground
high-speed public transport. It cleaned
up the Thames. So, that period, you had
the expression of that civic pride. I
started
I'm I I started work at the age of 16 in
Manchester Town Hall, which was the
ultimate statement of civic pride. And
it was competition. And Waterhouse won
that competition. That was my first
experience of architecture. Took me a
little longer to eventually discover
that I could study architecture. So, I
was a late starter at the age of 21. But
I can remember vividly right now details
of that building. I mean, that really
lifted my spirit. So, that whether it
was the great train stations, and of
course, today is the great airport. So,
if you really want to see the most
advanced airports in the world, where do
you go? I mean, it's obvious. Where We
know where you go. Right. There's a
There's a mock-up right behind you.
>> There's a huge model immediately behind
us here. The Beijing airport was built
in 5 years. Now,
at the same time I drew a parallel with
Terminal 5, which I think took 20 years
and was a fraction of the size and is
really a sort of band-aid on top of
Heathrow, which is still embedded in the
heart of uh you you overfly metropolis
together. So, now there are a lot of
messages perhaps mixed up in these
analogies and and comparisons.
>> No, it makes sense and I didn't
necessarily expect the interview to go
in this direction, but I'm actually just
going to press you further on this
specific point, which is
what is your diagnosis of why certain
countries do seem to have given up? Was
there a moment when you felt it? For
example, okay, in the UK, was there a
moment where you felt the the ambition
is not the same as it once was?
>> It's It's
It's interesting. I'm working on a
project right now. And the So, I'm with
a team
of relatively young architects.
And so, I'm
saying, "Well, in terms of domes of
of course, it would be interesting to
make a comparison with a particular dome
in the Festival of Britain 1951."
And everybody looked at me quizzically.
And I said,
"But you've never heard of it." And cuz
nobody
ever heard of it. So, so I said, "Well,
check it out and the next meeting, we'll
talk about it." The next meeting, they
came back and they
"Why didn't we know about that?" This
was 1951.
It was the biggest dome in the world. It
was demolished for political reasons,
interestingly. So, they were in awe, and
the images I mean, they're
extraordinary. So, 1951
was it more or less hard on the heels of
World War II.
And Britain was in true austerity mode.
You still had rationing. So, you had a
little book, and when you went to buy
food or clothes, then you could only
buy, depending on the number of coupons,
like postage stamps, that you'd got
left. But that period was the first
nuclear power station, was the first
commercial jet. It was the de Havilland
Comet, was in terms of cars, created the
R-type Bentley, 120 miles an hour, hour
on hour. It cost twice two houses at
that time, the semi-detached. So, this
was a an extraordinary era. Now, since
then, for a whole whole variety of
reasons, many of them political, it's no
longer the leading at that level of
innovation, manufacturing, and and so
on. And the Yeah, factors are quite
complex. Some of them are political and
others
are social. So, you do have this
cyclical, and you can look at the rise
and fall of of empires and the
relationship between um the way in which
that might be celebrated, either through
the technology or the architecture of
the time. And the architecture of the
Festival of Britain at that time was
absolutely extraordinary. And that was
the achievement of one administration,
but literally when the next
administration came down, for whatever
reason, I would surmise that it was seen
as a threat. So, it was demolished. The
only element which is still standing on
the South Bank on the South Bank, and
you know there is the Festival Hall, of
course. But, that was part of that uh of
that creation. I had no idea.
>> Yeah. Um that's fascinating. Um since
you brought up rationing,
how do budgets work for buildings? If
I'm a client of Foster and Partners, one
can dream, and I come to you and I say I
want to build a building. Do I present
you with a particular figure or a range,
or do you study my needs and then you
come back with a suggested budget?
>> There's there's no
there's no absolute way around this. I
mean,
it may be that the budget is absolutely
fixed. We have that amount of money. How
can we optimize? How can we maximize the
value?
Well, first of all,
there is not the relationship that you
would expect between quality
and how much you spend on a building.
Hm.
There are there are so many buildings I
could point to where a fortune's been
spent, and you just wouldn't ne- you
wouldn't want to go near that building.
>> the whole list.
There there are buildings where they're
noble buildings, and they were built on
very, very tight budget. So, quality is
an attitude of mind. It's not how much
you spend, it's how wisely you spend it.
So, that is philosophical,
but it's tangible in terms of the end
results. So, you may have somebody who
says, "That's it. This is my Yeah. This
is my resource." And there are there are
three resources.
And one is the most valuable. So, you
have money.
You have time.
Because time
is also money.
The longer you spend on your project,
most likely
the lower you're
actually going to get because, yeah.
So, the in many ways, when you can do
something faster
within reasonable limits, then you're
maximizing.
The Often, if you have a fixed
amount of time, and you draw that out
and draw it out, the money is losing
over that. But, the third resource is
creative energy.
And that is far and away the most
valuable, cuz that's going to determine
what you get for your money. So,
we we we know what happens
with whoever comes along, and their pot
is fixed.
What if they don't know?
Then I think you have the importance of
simulating, of modeling, and saying, if
you go in this direction, then it's
going to cost you that. If you go in
this direction, it's going to cost you
that. And in many ways, if again, if I
try and find a simple analogy, if you
take a a car, the base cost of that car,
in many cases, is relatively low. The
cost of driving it out of the showroom,
depending on the extras that you
either agreed or bought into, is going
to change the cost of driving that car
out of the the showroom. And in many
cases, that is obviously true of a
building. So, it's a part of the
creative process to actually define that
that budget. But,
um notwithstanding illusions,
the reality is that cost is always a
factor. But the important thing is also
and it's overlooked. It's not just the
cost of how much
it costs
to buy that building.
How much does it cost to run?
And then over the lifetime of that
project,
the decision to spend that amount of
money on that kind of building or
another kind of building. So, for
example, how do you put a price on the
ability of the Hong Kong Bank to be able
to introduce that dealers floor. Or for
Willis Faber, not to have to build
another building because they can
incorporate the new digital technology.
How do you put a price on that? And how
do you put a price on a building which
significantly improved productivity?
Because in the longer scheme of things,
the first cost of a building is a
relatively small proportion of the
bigger financial picture.
>> [music]
>> You mentioned creative energy and of
course one of your famous re- relatively
recent is it of course the big
circular building for Apple. And that's
a strange situation I imagine because
here is a company that is also known for
an insane amount of creative creative
energy in more or less the same realm as
yourself of visual design, right? Is
that a Was that a unique experience or
distinct experience to work on a
building for a company whose main
thing is also vis- in large part visual
aesthetic
and design.
>> No, I don't think it was because I don't
think that
ever
came into it. So,
Steve had the ability
to be able to be on his hands and knees
worrying about the detail of a plug and
a socket and at the same time
um
uh be uh sensitive to the big picture.
And I think that that there are
relatively few people that you come in
contact who have that appreciation
of the importance of scale. Mike
Bloomberg, by the way, and I'm not just
saying that, is another individual who
has in any conversation will challenge a
tiny detail or like the idea of having a
wooden floor and then all kinds of
things follow from that. But obviously,
um
is is you know
a big picture person which which we know
and we take for granted.
Lesser so, perhaps,
Mike's ability to to challenge a lifting
consultant
about the elevators and so on. So, um
and and I have to say that's fantastic.
I mean, the the most interesting
individuals to work with are those who
challenge. There's no question. And the
more that you do have that ability to
challenge each other in the process,
then arguably the better the end end
result. You know, you mentioned
productivity earlier and this is
slightly tangential to architecture, but
I would be very curious to get your
thoughts. We've seen productivity gains
in virtually every industry on Earth in
recent decades except famously the
construction industry. In the US
construction has lagged behind in terms
of productivity. I'm pretty sure it's a
similar story in the UK and perhaps some
other countries around the world. Do you
have a theory for why that is? Why
hasn't construction, I guess, developed
as much as a lot of other industries
technologically?
I think that
some
societies and it's interesting we were
talking earlier
about Asia, China.
There is a um
a book called Brag Neck by
Dan Wang.
>> Dan Wang.
>> He's been on this podcast many times.
And as you know, the
thesis behind that book
is that China is hierarchically is run
by engineers and they're about doing
things and America is run by lawyers and
they don't have necessarily
the same impulse.
>> the same priorities.
And I think that that's perhaps an
extreme example of
the fact that
some societies
the
status
is associated
with the ability
to make
of craft.
Switzerland
has that.
So,
in Switzerland the cabinet maker
those who make
have that standing
in society.
If I go to the United Kingdom
on a building site
it's
probably likely to be Polish speaking.
Why Polish speaking? Because those craft
skills
are still alive and well
in Poland and they've been exported. And
we talked
earlier about the
that time in 1951
when I was 16.
Um and
was I 16 in 19 Yes.
Now,
in that in the period between now and
then,
you had and this is not a criticism of
one particular party or one individual,
but Margaret Thatcher, who did whole
number of positive things, one of the
negative things was to dismember
the industrial base of the United
Kingdom.
And
not surprisingly perhaps then the status
of those who make accordingly
suffered. So,
I think that
the rather complex answer to your
question is that
some societies
encourage and ennoble and
I mean
it's it's it's interesting. I mean, my
my daughter is
just graduating from Yale in
architecture.
And one of the great things about the
Yale School of Architecture is unlike I
think any school that I know, in the
first year, they make a building. Hm.
They design a building
and then
they make it.
>> They actually build it.
>> They actually build it. I mean,
obviously they have supervision from
skilled builders. And then it it's
handed over and a family lives in it and
they see
the success or otherwise of their
endeavors, which is absolutely
fantastic. And one of the reasons why
and here
I
well,
you know that I'm a graduate of Yale, so
I'm a Yale alumni, so I have a certain
So, So, but the point that I was going
to make was that my daughter called me
and said, "I've just started work
on the building. I'm on a building
site."
And she said, "You know what? For the
first time, I really appreciate manual
workers.
I know what it is.
And and and it's that you know the the
the making of something. I mean, when
you go on a building site, you think,
"Is this ever going to turn into
something that can be habitable?" It's
muddy boots.
And part of the the practice we we're
talking about, or indeed anything,
whether it's here in the foundation
doing a project, whether it's in the
practice,
it's what we
push you get on the building site, you
get the hard hat on, you know, you get
into the factories, you engage with
those
This is not fashionable. This is not
necessarily taught Yale School of
Architecture, an exception. And there is
a nobility in making
And there should be in the same way, you
know, that those who protect us, those
who keep us healthy, you know,
that they they they should have a much
higher standing in society.
And this sort of leads to my next
question, and it kind of relates to I
guess the sort of cliché what should
young architects or aspiring architects
think about. But one dimension that I'm
particularly interested in is, okay, you
talk about how in the ideal scenario,
the engineers, the construction firm,
the architects, they're all there from
the beginning. That's not hand-off, and
that sounds really great, and that seems
to yield We're breaking down silos,
also.
>> On the other hand, that model also means
that when, you know, the client comes
with the budget, the architect just gets
one slice of it, right? And so, perhaps
and you know, architects in the US is
sort of famous for as professionals
unlike say doctors, lawyers, etc.
They're not paid as well as others and
maybe it's because you know, they're
sharing the they're sharing the pie with
many other entities. What should
aspiring architects think about to just
have like a satisfied career, but also a
remunerator remunerative career that can
sustain themselves?
No, you're absolutely right. I think
that it's um
it it it it's rooted in the
birth of the profession, which was
always an aristocratic
element. It was always a kind of
gentleman's pursuit and that may have
been appropriate at a point where
architecture was a very, very tiny slice
of the buildings that society needed.
So, it was your cathedrals, it was your
um
maybe your town halls, um
but but the whole
I mean, the the hospital was most likely
a converted other kind of building.
Airports didn't exist. Railway stations
didn't exist. So, the whole building
spectrum has grown,
but in many ways the importance of the
architect is an integral part of that.
Um and a decisive part because design
determines
so much of the outcome, the cost of a
building, the performance of a building,
how much it meets the the needs of a of
the public at large or the
everything we've been talking about.
That is under appreciated. It's under
valued and it's underpaid. And um
those of us who are able, we
we try to do what we can to uh to change
that. But you're needing really to
to bring in
the profession at an earlier stage of
decision-making.
>> Mhm.
I'm sure this question will not be
unexpected for you, but what happens to
architects in the age of AI? Because you
could mount a very clear argument that
if we have new technology that's able to
do pretty much everything including
potentially modeling and designing
buildings to very specific specs and
needs, that that will mean that
architects are perhaps even less well
remunerated than they are now.
I could argue an opposite point that if
you could do more with less, if you had
the enhancement of such a tool.
But if I go
back to square one, AI is
not something that happened yesterday.
It's been evolving gradually over time,
gaining momentum,
gaining awareness in the same way that
the whole issue of sustainability.
Sustainability was at the core of the
practice when it emerged in the 1960s.
You could argue the rest of the world
has finally caught up with that. But
many of the things that we were doing
back then were [clears throat] fringe
activity. Now they're mainstream.
They're in everybody's
front page um headline. And if
artificial intelligence is the
accumulation of everything that has gone
before,
then some of the most in- interesting
things that we've done architecturally
have not gone before. So, the
points that I was making about creating
a tower
without a central core and taking that
central core,
artificial intelligence is not going to
tell you about that. It's going to tell
you everything
that it knows about central core
buildings. It's backward looking. So,
you have to make a decision. So, so,
artificial intelligence is accumulated
history. What is history? It's the past.
So,
that is going to make it
even more important for those
who use all the
advantages of artificial intelligence,
but are not inhibitedly dependent on it.
Maybe it's a bit like going into the
home of Steve Jobs and finding a rare
book on a on a on a on a pedestal. The
rare book becomes even more
valuable in the digital age.
I have one last question. I don't I have
no idea if you like the term or find the
term starchitect annoying or not, but
you're you know, when you see a list of
them, you're one of them. But, there is
a generation of them who the people who
are called starchitects and there
doesn't seem to be a lot of new names.
And I'm curious if you perceive
the next century, could there be another
person to the extent that anyone ever
knows the names of architects is always
going to be somewhat narrow, but will
there be architects who emerge in the
next century that everyone knows the
name of or has something changed such
that that individual won't be a pop
culture figure in the same way?
I'm often invoking
buildings from the past
for the importance not just in terms of
nostalgia,
but for the lessons that we can learn
from them.
So, if I take the
solar-powered community
of
an educational institute like Masdar,
which is totally solar-powered in the
desert, that was only made possible
by applying the lessons from an
architecture of the past, which didn't
have access
to instant electrical energy to power
air conditioning. So, it was about
scaling streets for people and not cars,
creating shadow orientation. It was
about evaporative cooling, which meant
bringing in vegetation.
It was about colonnades for shade. It
was about layering a building. It was
about capturing the cool air
at a
an at a height above and funnelling it
through wind towers and so on. Applying
all of those lessons and then the
technology of our age, so able to
demonstrate that we can have the living
qualities that we take for granted, but
solar-powered in a very, very hostile
environment. So, that is learning from
an architecture without architects.
Obviously, those architects were there.
They didn't have a name. It was more
anonymous. If you fast forward, yes,
names are known. I think your star
architect, really. Inevitably, some
architects do the kinds of buildings
that um
that attract attention.
But,
also, if I take and you know, you're
looking at me when you're using that
word, but um
but but but I would I would I would like
to take you to a little building in
Manchester called Maggie's, which is a
cancer research station. I'd like to
take you to a small chapel, which is the
tiniest building that we've done
>> [clears throat]
>> on an island in
Venice. And each in these different
ways, particularly the Magus or some of
the hospital health work that we've done
is in its impact
you know,
>> [clears throat]
>> really, really significant. But it's not
newsworthy
because it doesn't happen to be
pace the model behind us, the biggest of
its kind at that time or the highest of
its kind or if it's Millau Viaduct. So,
it's in many ways what is newsworthy is
not necessarily what is the most
important of its time. We'll definitely
take you up on that tour if that's a
real offer by the
>> [laughter]
>> Absolutely.
All right, Norman Foster, thank you so
much for coming on [music] Odd Lots.
Really enjoyed it.
Thank you.
>> [music]
>> Joe, [music] that was a fascinating
discussion.
I feel like I have a new appreciation of
architecture. Not that I didn't
appreciate buildings before. Maybe I
should say I feel inspired to start
knocking down walls in my own my own
house. Go for it, Tracy. I think you
should. You know, I I I have to say I
did not expect that conversation to
really veer so much into like political
economy, basically, and some of the, you
know, to discuss the economic or why,
basically, countries like the UK and the
US decided to stop attempting to build
great things and the connection between
the era of building great things and
consumer rationing. And of course, you
know, China building a lot of great
things, also famous for financial
repression of various sorts. So, I was
not expecting to hear like that crisp
economic idea that we talk about a lot
articulated in this particular
conversation. By Norman Foster. No, um I
also think
>> expecting a Dan read the Dan Wang book.
That's right. Yeah. Uh what a reference.
Um we'll have to tell Dan about that.
>> Yeah. Well, the other thing I was
thinking, going back to the interview we
did with Allentown Mayor Matt Tuerk, was
this idea of small-scale manufacturing
and
>> I don't think he used this specific term
dignity at work, but this idea of, you
know, making things and then making the
job of making things desirable by
allowing people to like be close to
where they're working and things like
that. And you could see some parallels
with the construction industry today,
right? Like you want people to feel
proud of making things and you want the
process of making things to actually be
an enjoyable one. Everybody wants those
glistening like Shenzhen skylines, but
nobody wants to build them.
>> them. Yeah, no one wants to allocate the
societal resources to be part of the,
you know, the construction crew that
does that. That seems like the
the one of the big challenges of our
time. Yeah. Shall we leave it there?
Let's leave it there. This has been
another episode of the Odd Lots podcast.
I'm Tracy Alloway. You can follow me at
Tracy Alloway. And I'm Joe Weisenthal.
You can follow me at The Stalwart.
Follow our producers Carmen Rodriguez at
Carmen dash open at at dash bot, Keil
Brooks at Keil Brooks, and Kevin Lozano
at Kevin Lloyd Lozano. And for more Odd
Lots content, go to
bloomberg.com/oddlots
>> [music]
>> where we have a daily newsletter and all
of our episodes. And you can chat about
all these topics 24/7 in our discord,
[music] discord.gg/oddlots.
And if you enjoy Odd Lots, if you like
it when we [music] take the occasional
foray into architecture, then please
leave us a positive review on your
favorite podcast platform. And remember,
if you are a Bloomberg subscriber,
[music]
you can listen to all of our episodes
absolutely ad-free. All you need to do
is find the Bloomberg channel on Apple
Podcasts [music] and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.